@document.meta
title: 1.0-semantics
description: 
authors: vhyrro
categories: 
created: 2022-09-10
version: 0.0.13
@end

- ( ) Document stdlib macros/carryover tags/ranged tags
- ( ) Describe how tags are evaluated
- ( ) Document inbuilt attached modifier extensions and their behaviours
- ( ) When evaluating macros for attributes (inline elements w/ attached mod ext) and
      the `&var&` syntax they should be placed on a new line and /then/ expanded.
      This prevents user error.
- ( ) Explain how extendable links are macros under the hood.
- (x) Force `#eval` to take in a vararg of variable names to transfer to the janet side?
      How does `#eval` know the parameters passed to the current function?

- ::
  Example:
@code norg
  : . : Char
  : > : Name/Type
  : > : Categories
  : _ : `*`
  : > : Headings
  : > : structural, nestable
  : _ : `-`

  : . : Char
  : v : `*`
  : v : `-`
  : v :
  : / : Name/Type
  : v : Headings
  @end
  ---

* Introduction

  This file contains a formal description of the semantics of the Norg file format. For an
  introduction of what the Norg file format is, it is recommended that you read the [specification]
  first. When writing a syntax parser, it's not necessary for you to understand exactly how Norg is
  intended to behave - however, when writing a more sophisticated tool like
  [Neorg]{https://github.com/nvim-neorg/neorg}, understanding how various tags and dynamic elements
  behave is quite crucial.

  This specification, in contrast to the syntax specification, reads more like a book, with
  recommendations and requirements written out as they are applicable.

* Tags

  All dynamic/extendable parts of Norg are centered around tags and macros.
  The single {# macro tag} defines macros, and all of the other tag types
  execute a macro in some specific way.

** Common Definitions

   $ Macro Expansion
   The process of expanding a macro involves supplying it with the correct parameters,
   then replacing the macro invocation with the result, expanding any other macros that
   may be present in said result.

   $ Variable
   A variable is a macro that takes no parameters as input and always produces the same output
   regardless of context.

** Macro Tag

   The base form, the [macro tag]{:1.0-specification:*** Macro Tags} can be seen as a function
   definition - it defines the name of the macro, its parameters, and also what the macro evaluates
   to.
   
   An example implementation of a macro may look like such:
   |example
   =greet name
   Hello, &name&!
   =end
   |end
   
   We define a macro called `greet`, which takes in a mandatory parameter called `name`.
   When this macro is invoked, it evaluates to `Hello, &name&!`
   where the `&name&` variable is replaced with whatever we provided to the macro (see: {# macro
   expansion}, {# inline macro expansion}).
   
*** Macro Redefinitions

    Redefining a macro is permitted. One may have many reasons to redefine macros, it is most
    notably used however when redefining {$ variable}s (see {# parameters as macros}).

*** Parameters as Macros

    Since {$ variable}s are officially just macros without parameters, parameters supplied to
    macros are also themselves macros (hence they can be expanded with the `&inline macro
    expansion&` syntax).

*** Supplying Parameters to Macros

    By default, every parameter that a macro expects must be supplied, else an error should be
    thrown. If excess values are supplied, then the supplied parameters should be highlighted
    in some form in your editor or interpreter and a warning should be issued. Upon execution
    excess values should be discarded.

*** Parameter Modifiers (suffixes)

    There are three suffixes that may be applied to a macro to express some properties about the
    object. These are: `?` (optional variable), `*` (optional vararg), `+` (vararg with at least one
    element).

    To illustrate via an example:

    |example
    =mymacro variable?
    Where did my &variable& go.
    =end
    |end

    Now, it is possible to not supply the variable and not get an error. When expanding a "null"
    object, it should evaluate to an empty string, or in other words, to nothing.

    *NOTE:* Norg does not actually have a notion of null values. Instead, the null value is
    represented as an empty {* abstract objects}[abstract object]. See that section for more
    details.

    For the vararg variations, they exist to store an arbitrary amount of parameters within a single
    value, which may be thought of as a list of objects. Yet again, Norg does not have a notion of
    lists in their traditional sense, it simply encodes the list as a macro that, when expanded,
    evaluates to the contents of the list (space separated). For example:

    |example
    =vararg.expand args+
    Here are my args: &args&
    =end
    |end

    Given the input `test-arg1 test-arg2` the macro will evaluate to `Here are my args: test-arg1
    test-arg2`.

    When referencing the parameters in e.g. `&variable&` expansions you do not include the
    succeeding modifier.

*** Parameter Filters (prefixes)

    Apart from being able to supply a modifier to a parameter, you may also choose to filter
    out/support only certain kinds of parameters supplied from different sources. For example,
    you may only want your macro to be used in the context of a ranged verbatim tag, or you
    may only want your function to be usable when ran through an {# extendable links}[extendable
    link].

    Norg recognizes the following set of filters:
    - `=` - the content of an extendable link
    - `@` - content of a ranged verbatim tag
    - `\|` - content of a standard ranged tag
    - `>` - the next object (content of all carryover tag types). There is no way to differentiate
      between a `#` and `+` invocation, as both have consistent behaviours and return the same types
      of data
    - `&` - the "variable reference". Used seldom, but this prefix ensures that the value you
      provide as a string is a name of a variable that exists in the current scope. When paired with
      the `*` vararg and if no values are provided by the user, all variables in the current scope
      should be supplied as the content of the variable (see {# parameter filters (prefixes)}).
      Expanding the parameter reference should expand the variable the reference is pointing to.

    When referencing the arguments through e.g. the {# inline macro expansion}, you do not include
    the preceding modifier in the parameter name.

*** Macro Return Values

    Macros may return only one of three values:
    - Raw Norg Markup
    - An {# Abstract Objects}[abstract object]
    - An abstract object future

    When dealing with raw norg macros, one may only return raw norg markup.
    When invoking {* janet} from within the macro via {* the `eval` carryover tag},
    then the return value is determined by the last expression in the eval block.

    If the return value is not a {https://janet-lang.org/docs/strings.html}[string] , a
    `(neorg/abstract-object)` nor a `(neorg/await-abstract-object)`, then an appropriate error
    should be raised.

** Infirm Tags

   The simplest way to invoke a macro is via the infirm tag. It does not auto-supply any parameters
   like the rest do.

   An example usage looks like so:

   @code norg

   =greet name
   Hello, &name&!
   =end

   We then invoke the macro with the `.` prefix:

   .greet Vhyrro

   @end
   
   When expanding the macro, you get:
   @code norg

   Hello,
   Vhyrro
   \!

   @end

   Which, after an automatic reformatting, converts to `Hello, Vhyrro!`.
   See {# inline macro expansion} rules for more information.

** Ranged Tags

   Ranged tags are a special type of macro invocation. They take in arbitrary parameters, and then
   also consume some content until an end marker is reached. This content may be norg markup, in
   which case the tag in question is a /standard ranged tag/, otherwise the tag takes in verbatim
   markup and is a /verbatim ranged tag/.

   To create a macro that specifically targets a ranged tag, you may use one of the prefixes
   described {# parameter filters (prefixes)}[here]. Below is an example for the verbatim ranged
   tag that takes in a string and slices it by some amount:
   @code norg

   =slice start end? @content
   .eval janet (string/slice content start end)
   =end

   @end

   *NOTE:* When invoking the macro using the `@` tag syntax, the `content` variable should be auto-supplied
   by Norg. The content should always target the last parameter.

   The example uses {* janet} to perform the actual slicing logic. To invoke the macro, we use the
   ranged tag syntax:
   |example

   @slice 0 5
   hello world!
   @end

   |end

   When the macro is expanded, it evaluates to the norg markup `hello`. This is because the `.eval`
   call returns a string (see {# macro return values}).

* Inline Macro Expansion

  Inline macro expansion is the process of expanding the content of a macro in-line via the
  `&` attached modifiers.
  There is no way to supply parameters to an inline macro expansion and, therefore by definition,
  only {# variable}s may be expanded through this syntax.

  When performing inline expansion, the expansion must be isolated onto its own separate line,
  this involves prefixing and postfixing the inline macro expansion with newlines /and/ postfixing
  the expansion with an escape character (this is to prevent punctuation that may occur after the
  macro expansion to be treated as a detached modifier). This means that given the input `Hello,
  &name&!` (like in our [greet example]{# macro tag}), the macro should be isolated like this:

  @code norg

  Hello,
  &name&
  \!

  @end

  And only then should `&name&` be expanded to its underlying value.

  Such a rule allows these variables to expand to complex data types like headings, footnotes and
  other detached modifiers without unintentionally breaking.

  This rule also carries over to {* extendable links}.

** Compressing Expanded Results

   After the result has been expanded, your application may want to automatically reformat the
   output of the macro. Several lines for what could be a single line is unpleasant to look at,
   not to mention the extraneous escape character that the expansion might generate.

   Once the expansion is complete, an inbuilt formatter may choose to stitch the text back together
   in a coherent fashion, if the output of the macro does not begin with a detached modifier or tag.
   Following up with the example in the previous section:

   @code norg

   Hello,
   Vhyrro,
   \!

   @end

   May be compressed back to:

   @code norg

   Hello, Vhyrro!

   @end

* (=) Attributes

  Attributes are a special data type in Norg as they serve as a way to retain a function invocation
  for later use, and allow for combinatoric logic by chaining macro calls. If a carryover tag is
  applied to an attribute, then the carryover tag should /not/ be invoked on the attribute, but
  should instead be stored in the attribute's metadata internally in your application through the
  standard library function .

* Null Attached Modifier

  The null attached modifier serves two purposes - when used standalone, all text inbetween the two
  `%` modifiers gets removed. This means that, on its own, `%this%` acts as an inline comment
  syntax. When paired with attached modifier extensions, the attached modifier extensions determine
  how the text is displayed. For example, `%blue text%(color:blue)` renders the text as blue,
  without any further modifications. This allows for easy inline styling of objects or words, as `%`
  is non-verbatim (other markup can exist within it).

* Extendable Links

  Apart from the traditional inbuilt links, extendable links exist to allow custom search behaviour
  to be implemented within Norg. The extendable link is prefixed with a `=`, and has its behaviour
  governed by an succeeding attached modifier extension.

  The extendable link is simply a fancy macro invocation with two parameters, the second being
  optional: the content of the link, and the content of the link description (if any).

  This means that the following:
  @code norg
  {= some text}[a description](macro-name)
  @end

  Is equivalent to:
  @code norg
  .macro-name some\ text a\ description
  @end

  To explicitly capture extendable links, you may use the {# parameter filters (prefixes)}[`=`
  prefix] before your parameter name.

* The Standard Library

  Norg implements a cross-platform standard library that any [Neorg]-like implementation may use.
  It is never recommended to roll your own standard library.

  Despite this, a single macro is /required/ to be implemented by every client that implements Norg
  macros - this is the `.invoke-janet` macro. Its syntax looks like so:
  @code norg

  .invoke-janet code+

  @end

  Where `code` is a vararg of strings that get stitched together with a single space char before
  executing the code. Code should be executed in a janet {# sandboxing}[sandbox]. It forms the baseline for the
  `#eval` carryover tag.

  The `stdlib.norg` file can be found {/ stdlib.norg}[here].

* The `#eval` Carryover Tag

  Complex macros and their behaviours are only possible with a scripting language backing it. {*
  Janet} is our first class citizen language of choice, and there must be some way to execute it and
  return its result.

  For this, the `#eval` carryover tag exists, which is a wrapper around `invoke-janet`, ensuring
  every variable captured is valid. The `#eval` tag delegates the rest of the invocation logic to
  `(neorg/execute)` (see {# norg-janet standard library}), which also allows for execution of code
  in different programming languages.

  `#eval` always expects a `@code` block to follow itself containing the code to execute.

* Abstract Objects

  Abstract Objects (AOs) are an opaque data type within Norg. They serve as a way to represent some
  intermediate information about an object without having concrete Norg markup backing it.

  Abstract Objects have a few builtin properties - some must be provided, whereas others are left as
  optional:
  - The {# AST Node} that the abstract object would like to bind itself to (*optional*)
  - A translation function to convert the intermediate representation of the AO to any given target
    format (markdown, asciidoc etc.). The target may also be Norg itself. Returning `nil` tells
    Neorg that said object does not have a representation for the given target. (*required*)
  - Custom data that the AO would like to keep for future reference (*optional*)

  A prime example of AOs in use are `@code` blocks. There is no Norg syntax that `@code` blocks
  could possibly evaluate to, as Norg does not have a built-in code block syntax. Instead,
  when the `@code` macro is evaluated, it gets translated into an abstract object with some
  properties. Now, when the user wants to export their Norg document into markdown, the translation
  function is invoked, and the `@code` block is converted into a markdown fenced code block
  (`|```|`).

** "Null" Objects

   Null objects are a special type of AO, which form when the {# AST Node} is left as
   `nil`, and whose translation function simply always return an empty string (`""`).

   To produce a null AO, you may use the `(neorg/null-abstract-object)` function (see {* janet}[this
   section] on janet support).

** `&...&` expansion overrides

   When attempting to expand a {$ variable} through the inline macro expansion syntax (`&this&`),
   Norg should look at a few factors:

   ~ If the variable contains raw norg markup, paste the contents of the raw markup within the
     document, respecting the {# inline macro expansion} rules.
   ~ If the variable is an abstract object, then execute the translation function with the target
     language set to `norg`. If the returned result is raw norg markup, then perform step 1. If the
     translation function returns `nil`, then the macro is considered {# Bakeability}[unbakeable].
     When this is the case, issue a warning to your user letting them know that baking the macro is
     not possible.

* Bakeability

  "Baking" refers to the process of expanding a macro permanently and irreversibly by pasting its
  expanded form in place of the original macro invocation. Most macros can be baked, but not all.

  Baking is a process manually triggered by the user (with a keybind or command in your
  application). Not all macros can be baked, however.

  Baking of an object boils down to invoking the translation function of an {# Abstract
  Objects}[abstract object] with the target set to `norg`. If the function returns `nil`, then the
  macro is not bakeable.

* Tables

  Tables in Norg are rather alien. Instead of opting for a visual approach of defining a table,
  Norg's syntax serves as a way to "program" a table moreso than it is to create one on the spot.
  For a visual approach, one may use the `@table` tag, which evaluates to the official table syntax.

  In usual table implementations, tables start at the root (0, 0)\/A1. Afterwards, the user visually
  populates the table with entries in a dynamic fashion - new cells grow the table as they are
  encountered. In norg you are initially provided with an /infinite spreadsheet/ to act as a canvas,
  with a root (A1). Then, you define /cells/ which exist at some position in this canvas, i.e. A5,
  and the content of that cell gets placed at the specified position. You build tables by defining
  *both the what and the where*, instead of just the *what*.

  As stated previously, tables are defined by individual /cells/. Each `:` part of a table is
  considered a cell:
  @code norg
  : A1
    Cell one.
  : A2
    Cell two.
  @end

  The title portion of the `:` detached modifier determines /where to place the content of the
  cell/. Absolute positions are marked with a `[A-Z]+[0-9]+` syntax. For example, `A3` means "first
  row, third column". More crazy examples include: `AA230`,
  `B032` (preceding zeroes are trimmed, leaving `B32` as the final cell location).

** Motions

  Apart from absolute positions, one may opt for /relative positions/, using a combination of the
  following *motions*:

  - *Root motion*: `.` - this motion is a shorthand alternative to writing `A1`. It denotes the root
    of the table.
  - *General motions*: `<`, `>`, `^`, `v` - these define a single movement left, right, up and down
    relative to the previous cell, respectively.
  - *Floor motion*: `_` - moves down once and continues moving left until the leftmost /populated/
    cell is encountered. This allows for easy creation of left-to-right tables, as you may choose a
    starting position for your table, use the `>` motion to populate entries to the right, and then
    slide back to the left with the `_` operator as if you were sliding back the paper bail of a
    typewriter - your "cell cursor" is now back at the beginning, just a row lower.
  - *Ceiling motion*: `/` - another paradigm for creating tables that isn't left-to-right is
    top-to-bottom. In this case, you define a starting position and use the `v` motion to move down
    and populate cells, after which you use the `/` operator to move one cell to the right and to
    move back to the top. The `/` operator should continue searching upwards for the upmost
    /populated/ cell, and consider that the "ceiling".

*** Motion Repetition

    Motions may be prefixed with a count to repeat the motion `n` amount of times.
    Different motions may also be combined.

    Examples include:
    - `3>`  - move to the right three times
    - `2_`  - perform two floor motions
    - `2>v` - move to the right twice, then down a single cell

*** Left-side Underflow

    Norg allows a semantic edge case for the `<` motion - when the motion is at column `1` and the
    left motion is used the motion underflows to the row above, occupying the position of the
    rightmost /populated/ cell. It may be considered the inverse (or the undoing) of the floor
    motion (`_`).

** Intersecting Modifiers

   Commonly you'll see the intersecting modifier used to make tables appear simpler.
   Instead of writing out the full syntax:
   @code norg
   : A1
   Content.
   @end

   When the cell only contains text users will commonly write:
   @code norg
   : A1 : Content.
   @end
   for brevity.

** Dynamic Positioning

   A unique side effect of Norg allowing cells to exist at arbitrary positions in an infinite canvas
   includes /being able to place cells at dynamic positions using macros/:
   @code norg
   : &position&
   Content.
   @end

   The `position` variable may depend on parameters or other data within the current table,
   yielding complex behaviours.

** ( ) Examples

   TODO

* Janet

**** Norg-Janet Standard Library

** AST Nodes

  ===

%| vim: set tw=100 :|%
