@document.meta
title: Norg's Design Decisions
description: An explanation of every feature in Norg.
authors: vhyrro
categories: [
    non-spec
]
created: 2023-08-06
updated: 2023-11-07T18:53:39+0100
version: 1.1.1
@end

* Introduction

  Oftentimes you may encounter some new or alien syntax within Norg and ask yourself "What on earth is this? Why did
  this thing get implemented in this way specifically?". This document aims to cover all of the things Norg does better
  (and sometimes worse) than other file formats.

  First of all, what is Norg? Norg is a modern attempt at a markup format, taking the best parts from all of the older
  markup languages we could find, and generalizing and standardizing all of it in a single package. Norg is simple
  enough to be a markdown alternative, but also expressive enough such that it even beats the `org` file format
  feature-wise.

* Rule 1: Indentation = Bad

  On the surface, indentation sounds like a fantastic idea. It's great for human eyes,
  our eyes love indents! They nicely segregate information and require no clunky syntax to
  operate - want to nest a list? Just indent it!

  Almost ironically, markdown was amongst the first to introduce this as a feature. In the [commonmark
  specification]{https://spec.commonmark.org/0.30/} you will find the following quote:

  > What distinguishes Markdown from many other lightweight markup syntaxes, which are often easier to write, is its
    readability. As Gruber writes:
  >> The overriding design goal for Markdown’s formatting syntax is to make it as readable as possible. The idea is
     that a Markdown-formatted document should be publishable as-is, as plain text, without looking like it’s been
     marked up with tags or formatting instructions.

  However indentation has some faults, and these faults are not only annoying for the parser implementer but also for
  the user - they make output unpredictable and as a result make the document feel "unstable". Indent an object two
  characters too many and watch how the next three paragraphs of your text now look terrible when rendered.

  On the parsing side, indentation is a difficult topic. Tree-sitter is essentially the defacto parsing library
  nowadays, it supports LR and GLR parsing strategies with a single character of lookahead. For the person who doesn't
  do parsing for a living (lucky you) this means that the parser only has a single/the next character as its context,
  which means it can't backtrack in the document nor can it look ahead into the document - it feels like parsing things
  this way should be impossible, but as it turns out people are smart and GLR works with almost any language, even
  highly complicated/ambiguous ones. One thing you will notice if you ever read the source code of tree-sitter parsers
  is that for markup formats (markdown, org) as well as programming languages (python, haskell) that utilize
  indentation a custom lexer written in C/C++ is ALWAYS used to track said indentation levels within a dynamic array. Defining
  how indented objects behave using just a grammar is simply infeasible and in most cases - impossible.

  Indentation is also difficult for formatters and auto-fix tools. There is no unambiguous way to determine what the
  indentation level should be for any given line. Take for example the following markdown snippet:

  @code markdown

  - Text
  Here.

  @end

  Given that the second line is not indented, it should not belong to the list item, right? But if we apply an indent, suddenly the text does
  become a part of the unordered list:

  @code markdown

  - Text
    Here.

  @end

  Hence, a formatter has to assume that the indentation level you assigned initially is the /expected/ indentation
  level. It cannot catch what is quite literally a bug in your document, nor can it issue any sort of warning. You will
  have to find out that your document is ill-formatted when it's already too late. The only possible way to discover if
  your document is ill-formatted (without painstakingly proofreading your document and your indents) is by rendering
  the document and viewing the output, which paradoxically goes against the philosophy of your document being readable
  and parsable without rendering being a requirement. It is safe to argue that for most cases it does not matter if
  your eyes see something slightly dedented or not, but for a *machine* it absolutely does - and since publishing
  markup documents is a process of communicating to a *machine* how you would like your content rendered, this simple
  problem is exponentially worse than it otherwise would be.

** The Solution

   It is possible to maintain readability-at-a-glance while eliminating indentation, and that includes /special characters/ and /implied boundaries/.
   Special characters are self explanatory - you may have a special character that denotes the beginning or end of a section, like where the content
   of a footnote starts and ends or when to begin a new heading. This however needs to be used effectively and sparingly to prevent high amounts of verbosity
   and unnecessary extra characters.

   Implied boundaries exist in Norg thanks to our heavy use of {** Rule 2: Generalize, Generalize,
   Generalize...}[generalizations]. For example we specify that every object that is considered a nestable detached modifier has by default
   a single paragraph that follows it. Since lists are a nestable detached modifier, this solves our ambiguity problem:
   @code norg

   - Text
   Here.

   @end

   Since lists must have a paragraph that follows them the second line is also consumed as part of the list, regardless of indentation.
   To make the text separate, apply a paragraph break (two newlines):
   @code norg

   - Text

   Here.

   @end

   This enforces consistency and allows a formatter to unambiguously determine that a segment should be indented a specific way.
   Such implied boundaries are present all over Norg, and are easy to spot and understand!

* Rule 2: Generalize, Generalize, Generalize...

  Features that almost all modern markup formats suffer from include scattered syntax. So much syntax is reserved for
  so many different purposes, and as such developers of these formats have difficulties making memorable and coherent
  constructs. As it turns out, it is essentially impossible to make a perfectly coherent system without sacrificing
  /something/ with regards to the functionality or usability, but I would personally say that Norg has succeeded in
  structural consistency. The specification lays out a set of ground "axioms" (concepts) like detached modifiers,
  attached modifiers, then derives new constructs from these initial axioms. Detached modifiers change into Structural
  Detached Modifiers, Rangeable Detached Modifiers and Nestable Detached Modifiers; Attached Modifiers can be basic or
  free-form, and constructs that can be present in many places (e.g. the detached modifier extension) have consistent
  behaviours no matter where they are used.

  This sounds very easy to achieve when you say it out loud, however there are quite a lot of problems at play.

** Rule 2.1: Keywords = Bad

   Norg strays from using keywords (i.e. reserved words) for any of its syntax. Everything is done solely through punctuation, which gives an immediate indication
   to the reader that said character has some special function. Given that markup languages /obviously/ can contain
   any word from the English language, it's a very bad idea to introduce keywords.

   Keywords like `org`'s `TODO`/`CANCELLED`/etc. invite platform-specific implementations as their meanings and values
   are fully configurable at runtime. Norg always opts for an approach where user-customizable functionality is parsed
   inside of a well-defined construct. That way the parser parses whatever is in the construct as normal text, and then
   semantic analysis tools may kick in to understand more about the meaning of the document. This is, in our opinion,
   the "best of both worlds" approach.

** Rule 2.2: No Character Repetition

   Characters should never be repeated to create or derive new syntax (and in Norg are only used to signify nesting
   levels). This might seem like a rather arbitrary rule, but there's a little more depth to it than you may think. For
   starters, the obvious reason - since the syntax-to-semantics mapping should be as 1:1 as possible, arbitrarily
   repeating characters to derive completely new syntax breaks the mapping entirely. In layman's terms, this means that
   you want one bit of syntax to map to one bit of behaviour. Imagine if `[this]` were an anchor and then `[[this]]`
   were a wiki link, where's the common baseline between the two? What do they have in common? Nothing really. Their
   syntax is similar, but the behaviour (semantics) are all over the place. Sure, you can memorize that this is the
   syntax and just roll with it, but that's precisely /all/ you can do, just sit, stare and copy. You can't logically
   deduct "ah if I have `[this]` and I double the characters I'll logically get a wiki link".

   Another reason is syntactical ambiguity - Norg treads on a very thin line ambiguity wise. Our attempt of playing
   with ambiguity is about the closest you can get before wreaking havoc. By enforcing singular characters it's
   possible to use contextual information with a single character of lookahead. Take for example the closing attached
   modifier, which requires that it is followed by a whitespace; let's also assume that this closing modifier is the
   `$` (inline maths) symbol. When parsing, you can encounter a `$` char then advance the parser and go "of course,
   there's no whitespace character afterwards, this should simply be considered a PUNCTUATION node". With a double
   character, you'd have to parse the first `$`, then look out in case you encounter /another/ `$` and then see if
   there's whitespace after - if there is, you succeeded, great. But what if there isn't? You are forced to return a
   single PUNCTUATION node whose content is both of the `$` chars, since you cannot backtrack. Ideally you'd like to
   return two separate `$` nodes, as the second `$` node could potentially be an opening modifier for another inline
   maths segment... oh yeah, what happens *in that case*?

   Yeah, this happens...

   @code norg

   $hello$$world$

   $$hello$$world$

   @end
   /*Oh no*/. Now we need to track states of opening and closing modifiers to figure out which modifier is which.
   Great.

   So, preventing double modifiers also prevents ambiguities with regular starting/closing modifiers, but how do you
   fix the following case?:

   @code norg

   *hello**world*

   @end

   Your eyes are probably telling you that this is a simple solution - a bold followed by another bold. But one thing
   you quickly learn when developing markup languages is that your eyes like to deceive you /a lot/. Simple visual
   problems become not so simple when you actually have to tell a computer to do the solving. However, there is a trick
   up our sleeve, and it's /only possible with non-duplicated characters/ - the trick is to disqualify the problem,
   literally. When parsing, if an attached modifier is repeated twice or more consecutively, then that whole set of
   characters (no matter the context) should be treated as regular text and should be "disqualified" from becoming an
   attached modifier. What this means is that `*hello**world*` is actually treated a /single bold/ with `hello**world`
   as its content. Pretty nifty, why have a problem when you can just delete the problem, right?

   ===

* Attached Modifiers and Escape Character Shenanigans

  One place where Norg diverges a little is with the behaviour and constraints of inline markup, like `*this*`. This section will specifically
  focus on the way we eliminated an entire category of ambiguities related to parsing of attached modifiers.

** Huddle Up

   Norg requires that opening and closing modifiers are huddled to the text they belong to.

   TODO.

* Divergence from `org-mode`

  Norg syntax diverges from both markdown and org-mode syntax only when there is a better or more consistent way to
  represent the same concept.

  A specification describing `org`'s markup syntax may be found {https://orgmode.org/worg/org-syntax.html}[here].

  An important note to make is that the `org` specification may not always translate 1:1 to the parser within Emacs's
  `org-mode`. The specification is an attempt /after the fact/ to create a standard for the `org` file format.

** Dropped Features

   There are several features that we never decided to "port"/recreate from `org` due to ambiguity/inconsistency/lack of
   necessity.

*** Zero-column Headers

    In `org` headers must be defined at column zero of a new line. This may be a parser or ambiguity limitation that
    we are simply unaware of. What we do know is that there is no ambiguity limitation within Norg, and as such
    headings can be defined after any amount of preceding spaces.

*** Statistics Cookies

    Statistics cookies are objects that you can attach to e.g. headings or lists to display progress.
    These aren't things that we believe need to be physically placed in the document and can be displayed virtually
    by something like Neorg.

    Their main problem is that they clash with other syntax elements that make use of `[]` characters, especially so
    in a syntax like Norg.

*** Radio Links

    Radio links (`<<<this>>>` in `org`) are in our opinion simply bad design. The use of three of the same characters to
    open and close the radio link can be a nightmare to parse. Not only is the syntax bad, the semantics are not great
    either.

    Below is an example of how radio links are used:

    @code org

    This is some <<<*important* information>>> which we refer to lots.
    Make sure you remember the *important* information.

    @end

    Identifying what plain text is part of what radio link makes for a computationally intensive problem to solve.
    This is not the right idea. This feature exists in the form of anchors within Norg.

*** Inlinetasks

    We have looked at this syntax element over 20 times by now and we still have no clue what the idea behind this was.

    @code org

    *************** TODO some small task
                     DEADLINE: <2009-03-30 Mon>
                     :PROPERTIES:
                       :SOMETHING: or other
                     :END:
                     And here is some extra text
    *************** END

    @end

    If you indent a heading far enough (past `org-inlinetask-min-level` which is an `org-mode` specific configuration
    option) that heading ends up becoming an inline task and has to then be closed with `END`... peculiar. Needless to
    say this feature does not exist in any capacity within Norg.

*** Fixed Width Areas

    Fixed width areas are a waste of a syntax element which could theoretically be implemented using regular `#+begin_*`
    blocks if the right semantics were put in place. This is enabled via ranged tags in Norg.

*** Zero-width Space as Escape Character

    We were really torn on this idea. On one hand it's somewhat genius, on the other hand it is completely atrocious. To
    escape a character (i.e. to treat it as raw text) you would usually use a backslash in any programming language or
    markup language like Markdown. Org decided to prefix its characters with a zero-width space so it is never visible
    to you.

    Not only is this a non-standard character that is not present on any keyboard, we imagine it to cause a lot of confusion
    when you open up someone else's `org` file and see some syntax elements treated as raw text with no clear indication
    of why. Was it a bug, or was it a zero-width space?

*** Embedded LaTeX Environments

    While latex environments absolutely exist in Norg, they are not as tightly intertwined with the syntax as they are with
    `org`. In `org` you may `\\begin{}` and `\\end{}` in any part of the document, making it hard for parsers to
    identify when to parse LaTeX and when to parse `org` syntax. In Norg all latex is contained within ranged tags for
    ease of parsing and isolation.

*** Export Snippets

    Export snippets take on the form of `@@prefix:value@@`. These have no use in the context of how Norg approaches
    exporting, so the feature has been promptly dropped in our implementation.

*** Angle Links

    In Norg, all links must be marked between `{}` curly brackets. It's not "allowed" to have raw inline links without
    marking that segment of text as a link. As such angle links have no use within Norg.

*** Drawers and Property Drawers

    Drawers are ways of attaching metadata to an element or creating a collapsable section of text. This has been
    replaced with rich metadata from inline link targets as well as with macros.

*** The Zeroth Section

    `Org` distinguishes the first section of a document and limits what syntax can be used inside of it.
    Norg sees no difference whether a section of the document is at the beginning, end or in another dimension of
    spacetime.

*** The `|clock: |` Element

    There are very few resources as to what this is online, but based off of the explanations of the spec we assume this
    to be a standalone element like so:

    @code org

    clock: [inactive timestamp]

    @end

    This does not exist within Norg and clocking functionality is implemented through metadata/macros.

** Inline Markup

   Called "text markup" within the `org` specification or "attached modifiers" in the `norg` specification.

*** General Changes

    For starters, there are some general changes that Norg makes with inline markup:

    - Strikethrough has been changed from the somewhat cryptic `+strikethrough+` to `-strikethrough-`
    - Verbatim has been changed from `=verbatim=` to `|`verbatim|`.
    - The concept of a "code" object (`~this~`) has been dropped and merged with the `|`verbatim`|` object.
      We make the argument that semantically code is something you would like to have displayed verbatim and special
      styling can be done through the use of macros instead of having two different syntax elements.
    - Subscripts and superscripts are simpler in Norg than in `org`. Superscript is done `^like so^` and subscript
      is done `,like so,`. Thanks to our attached modifier rules these never interfere with your regular text.

*** Contexts in which Markup may be used

    Within `org`, text markup may be used when the actual markup itself (e.g. `*example text*`) is immediately preceded
    by `-`, `(`, `{`, `'`, `"`, or the beginning of a line. This behaviour is not notably consistent, may not work with
    all natural languages which might have different punctuation rules and is far from complete.

    Additionally, `org`'s permitted closing characters include "either a whitespace character, `-`, `.`, `,`, `;`, `:`,
    `!`, `?`, `'`, `)`, `}`, `[`, `"`, `\\` (backslash), or the end of a line". Not only is this inconsistent with the
    allowed preceding rules, it yet again does not play well with all locales.

    Within Norg, preceding and succeeding rules are the same, and the opening and closing modifier must be immediately
    preceded or succeeded by "anything in the general Unicode categories `Pc`, `Pd`, `Pe`, `Pf`, `Pi`, `Po` or `Ps` or
    whitespace" for the opening and closing modifier respectively. This ensures consistency across locales and across
    the format itself.

** TODO Statuses

   Within Org it is common to see specialized statuses attached to headings like `TODO`, `DONE`, `CANCELLED`.
   These allow more complex states than the simple done/undone/pending states permitted by TODO items in lists.

   However, these pose quite a few issues. First of all, such statuses are /keywords/ (not to be confused with `org`'s
   interpretation of keywords which look like so: `#+key: value`). The reason why Norg doesn't use keywords is explained
   in {** Orgmode: Keywords Bad}[this section]. They confuse plain text with something that has semantic weight
   attached. These TODO/DONE/CANCELLED keywords are also fully configurable. This is good for most cases, but pretty
   taxing on parser developers if they ever want to create a compliant `org` parser as there is no real "default" set
   of these TODO Statuses that you can support; furthermore, it messes with parsers that cannot make decisions or modifications to
   its grammar dynamically like `tree-sitter`.

   Additionally, why is this syntax not simply merged with the TODO syntax? Why is it not possible to create a list that
   is `TODO` (`- TODO Something`(lang:org)), but instead one must use `- [ ] Something`? This also works the other way
   around - why must we specify a `TODO` keyword in our headings when we could simply do `* [ ] Something`?

   Norg merges the two syntaxes into a single unified `\( \)` syntax which can be applied to any element within the
   syntax. Undone headings, footnotes, lists, definitions, quotes? All of that is possible. This generalized syntax not
   only lends itself better towards parsers, but also lends itself better towards its users, allowing them to track
   states of any part of the document. Below are some examples of this syntax:

   @code norg

   * ( ) Undone heading

   > (x) Done quote

   ^ (-) Pending footnote
   I'm currently working on this footnote which is why I marked it pending.

   @end

   This is not the end of the story however. Instead of the basic done, undone and pending states which are the only
   states present within `org` Norg implements an extra 8 statuses for every possible use case. Below are examples of
   all of the different states in Norg, each attached to an unordered list item:

   @code norg

   - ( ) Undone
   - (-) Pending
   - (x) Done

   - (?) Uncertain task (do I /really/ have to do this?)
   - (=) On-hold
   - (_) Cancelled (archived)

   - (!) This task is urgent.

   - (@ date) Task occurs on this date
   - (< date) Task is due by this date
   - (> date) Task starts on this date
   - (+ date) This task recurs on this date

   - (# A) Task has a priority of A

   @end

   These statuses may also be merged with the pipe (`\|`):

   @code norg

   - (< date|-) Task that I am actively pursuing and is due by `date`.

   @end


** Indentation

   See {* Rule 1: Indentation = Bad}.

** Links

   TODO.

** Metadata

   TODO.


* Why Janet?

  A common question that is asked is why Norg decided to use Janet as its main scripting language. There are many
  reasons, but the main reasons will be listed below.

** Lisps are Good with Structured Data

   Love them or hate them, lisps are physically built for working with objects that have structure to them.
   In Norg, structures are all over the place, most notably in the form of nodes. Any part of the Norg document
   can be accessed and every item (a list, a heading, a paragraph) can be manipulated and viewed in the form of a node.
   Many nodes then build up a tree which constitutes the entire document.

   Manipulating data related to these nodes is frictionless in a lisp as in a lisp everything is data. Weaving complex
   operations together takes no effort and is much simpler to reason about in comparison to e.g. a pure functional
   programming language like Haskell or a fully imperative language like Lua.

** Janet is /Easy to Reason About/

   Janet reads just like an imperative language - a sequence of steps that are performed one by one. Brackets mostly
   signify scope.
   This similarity of thought processes just like in imperative languages makes any common programmer feel right at
   home.

** Janet is /Lightweight/

   Janet is an incredibly lightweight language. Its interpreter was built to be fast, portable and also small. Tight
   integrations with C means there's little code duplication around. The syntax of the language is also small and
   predictable, similarly to how Lua has a small but effective syntax set.

** Janet is /Portable/

   Because of its simplicity and portability Janet sees many integrations with other libraries. Parsing things
   like JSON or TOML is wonderfully unsophisticated. Janet even sees bindings for `tree-sitter` and more.

** Janet Has a /Built-in PEG Parser/

   This is easily the biggest selling point of using Janet as a primary scripting language for Norg. There are many
   situations where you might want to parse a snippet using Janet. These usually involve areas where the Norg
   `tree-sitter` parser cannot reach, i.e. content of verbatim ranged tags or custom parsing of macro parameters.

   PEG is a combinatoric parsing library. In layman's terms, it allows you to combine simple parsing functions together
   to form a more complicated parser like Lego bricks.

   A prime example of a use case within Norg is the `@table` macro. `@table` allows the user to write a table using
   Markdown-like syntax which then gets translated to the more verbose Norg table syntax. Parsing the Markdown-like
   table is not the job of the Norg parser, rather, it is up to the macro itself to properly parse the contents of the
   verbatim ranged tag. For this reason a scripting language with good parsing support is critical and an inbuilt PEG
   implementation is perfect for what we need.

   ---

  To summarize, finding a scripting language that:
  - Works very well with structured data.
  - Is approachable by almost any common programmer.
  - Is lightweight, simple and extensible.
  - Has parsing capabilities built in.

  Proves to be mightily problematic without resorting to esoteric languages (hence breaking the second bullet point).

  In our hours of searching, Janet was the only language that not only fulfilled those criteria, but also provided more
  with a working package manager and a well-featured, community-maintained extension library (`spork`). We believe this
  is as close to a perfect scripting language for a markup format as is possible!

#comment
vim:tw=120:
